
                RTP C and Fortran Tools
                -----------------------

               H. Motteler and S. Hannon


Introduction
-------------

This package contains procedures to read and write RTP (Radiative
Transfer Profile) format files from C and Fortran.  See rtpspec.pdf
in the rtp/doc directory for more information on the format and the
Fortran and C programming interface.  Matlab RTP tools are available
in matlib/h4tools, in a separate repo, git@github.com:strow/matlib.


Building the Distribution
--------------------------

To build the RTP package you need to have HDF4 installed.  This is
available from the HDF Group at http://www.hdfgroup.org/.  To build
the RTP library and utilities, edit the top level Makefile to set
HDFHOME to the local HDF4 installation.  You may also need to change
some of the compiler parameters.  Then type "make".  The top level
Makefile will enter each of the subdirectories src, test, and utils,
and leave a new librtp.a in rtp/lib.

If the build was successfull cd into rtp/test and run rtpsize,
rtptest1, rtptest2, pvtest, ftest1, and ftest2.  These are good as
sanity but checks, but are not comprehensive tests.  More exhaustive
testing should be done by checking the interoperability of the
C/Fortran and Matlab packages.

Parameters in the header files can be changed, but this should be
done with caution, and is not generally be necessary.  The size
limits in rtp.h and rtpdefs.f, and the field definitions in rtp.h,
rtpdef.h, and rtpdefs.f, must all match.  The size limits in rtp.h
are for the struct buffers, and are upper bounds on the actual RTP
field sizes.


Reading and Writing RTP Data
-----------------------------

The Fortran API consists of four routines: rtpopen.f, rtpread.f,
rtpwrite.f, and rtpclose.f; a brief description of parameters and
actions is given at the beginning of each file, and in rtpspec.pdf.
Fields are defined in rtpspec.pdf, and in rtp.h.

To use the RTP routines, C and Fortran programs need to link to
librtp.a.  Fortran application programs need to include rtpdefs.f,
and C application need to include rtp.h.

The Fortran API uses static structures for header and profiles,
that include all the RTP fields.  Normally, only a subset of the
fields will be used, and the field size variables in the header
are used to determine what is actually read from or written to a
file.

The field set in the HDF file and the field set defined in the C and
Fortran structures do not have to match exactly, or be in the same
order.  For reads, unknown fields are ignored.  For writes, values
set for the header fields ptype, ngas, nchan, memis, and mlevs are
used to determine which fields will be written.  If a size is zero,
or if a field group is not specified with pfields, the corresponding
field or fields are left out of the file.


RTP Utilities
--------------

rtpdump is a basic dump tool for examining RTP files; it will print
out field sets, attributes, and header and profile data.

  USAGE

     rtpdump [-achp] [-n <k>] rtpfile

  OPTIONS

     -a      dump attributes
     -c      dump RTP channel info
     -h      dump header structure
     -p      dump profile structure
     -n <k>  select profile <k> for channel or profile 
           structure dumps; the first profile is 1

  BUGS

     the output is from debug and error dump routines and is not very
     fancy; the -p option only prints a subset of profile fields

There is also a simple "rtpsize" utility, that prints out structure
sizes and does some basic checks that the header and profile fields
match the field name and size list (the "flists").


HDF Utilities
--------------

RTP data is currently saved in the HDF 4 Vdata format, and can be
accessed and manipulated directly with HDF utilities.  For example,

    hdp dumpvd -h -c "RTP data" test1.hdf

will list the field set actually in the HDF Vdata file test1.hdf.
The utility "hdp" is part of the HDF 4 distribution.  "hdp dumpvd"
will give a short list of vdata dump options.  See the documentation
with the HDF distribution for more information.


RTP Files
----------

RTP Fortran interface

  rtpdefs.f     -- Fortran RTP structure definitions

  rtpopen.c     -- Fortran interface to open RTP files
  rtpread.c     -- Fortran interface to read an RTP profile
  rtpwrite.c    -- Fortran interface to write an RTP profile
  rtpclose.c    -- Fortran interface to close an RTP open channel
  rtpvers.c     -- Fortran interface to return the RTP version

  ftest1.f      -- Fortran read and write demo
  ftest2.f      -- Fortran read and write demo

RTP C interface

  rtp.h         -- RTP header and profile structures
  rtpdef.h      -- RTP definitions that reserve space
  rtpfnx.h      -- RTP function prototypes 

  rtpread1.c    -- RTP read setup
  rtpread2.c    -- read HDF vdata into struct buffer
  rtpwrite1.c   -- RTP write setup
  rtpwrite2.c   -- write structure buffer to HDF vdata
  rtpclose1.c   -- detach and close
  gsplit.c      -- expand gamnt to a gas_<n> sublist
  getchan.c     -- find next free RTP channel
  rtphcheck     -- sanity check for RTP header values

  rtptest1.c    -- test RTP write new and read back in
  rtptest2.c    -- test RTP read existing, modify, and write

low level vdata routines

  pvfunc.h      -- pv ("profile vdata") function prototypes
  pvdefs.h      -- parameters and structures for reading HDF vdatas

  pvopen.c      -- open an HDF vdata file, start the VS interface
  pvread1.c     -- read vdata attributes, setup to read vdata data
  pvread2.c     -- read an HDF vdata, after the pvread1 setup
  pvread3.c     -- wrapper for VSdetach
  pvwrite1.c    -- vdata write setup
  pvwrite2.c    -- write an HDF vdata
  pvwrite3.c    -- detatch the vdata
  pvclose.c     -- stop the V interface and close the vdata file
  pvmatch.c     -- match vdata buffer to structure fields

  pvtest.c      -- test pvread and pvwrite family of functions

misc utilities

  dump_hstr.c   -- dump the header structure 
  dump_pstr.c   -- dump the profile structure
  dump_flist.c  -- dump an RTP field list
  dump_chan.c   -- dump info on an open RTP channel 
  dump_attrs.c  -- dump an RTP attribute list
  dump_vbuf.c   -- dump a vdata buffer

  rtpdump.c     -- basic RTP dump utility
  rtpsize.c     -- check and print out structure sizes

data files

  test4.hdf     -- 48 fitting profiles, used in some of the tests

